
# About Non-blocking Operation in the Client Library

MariaDB, starting with version 5.5.21 supports *non-blocking* operations in
the client-library. This allows an application to start a query or other
operation against the database, and then continue to do other work (in the same
thread) while the request is sent over the network, the query is processed in
the server, and the result travels back. As parts of the result become ready,
the application can — at its leisure
— call back into the library to continue processing,
repeating this until the operation is completed.


Non-blocking operation is implemented entirely within the client library. This
means no special server support is necessary and non-blocking operation works
with any version of the MariaDB or MySQL server, the same as the normal
blocking API. It also means that it is not possible to have two queries running
at the same time on the same connection (this is a protocol limitation). But a
single thread can have any number of non-blocking queries running at the same
time, each using its own MYSQL connection object.


Non-blocking operation is useful when an application needs to run a number of
independent queries in parallel at the same time, to speed up operation
compared to running them sequentially one after the other. This could be
multiple queries against a single server (to better utilize multiple CPU cores
and/or a high-capacity I/O system on the server), or it could be queries
against multiple servers (e.g. `[SHOW STATUS](../../../sql-statements-and-structure/sql-statements/administrative-sql-statements/show/show-status.md)` against all
running servers for monitoring, or a map/reduce-like operation against a big
sharded database).


Non-blocking operation is also very useful in applications that are already
written in a non-blocking style, for example using a framework like
[libevent](https://libevent.org/), or, for example, a GUI-application using an
event loop. Using the non-blocking client library allows the integrations of
database queries into such applications, without the risk of long-running
queries "hanging" the user interface or stalling the event loop, and without
having to manually spawn separate threads to run the queries and re-synchronize
with the threads to get the results back.


In this context, "blocking" means the situation where communication on the
network socket to the server has to wait while processing the query. Waiting
can be necessary because the server has not yet had time to process the query,
or because the data needs to travel over the network from the server, or even
because the first part of a large request needs to be sent out on the network
before local socket buffers can accept the last part. Whenever such a wait is
necessary, control returns to the application. The application will then run
`select()` or `poll()` (or something similar) to detect when any wait
condition is satisfied, and then call back into the library to continue
processing.


An example program is available in the MariaDB source tree:


```
tests/async_queries.c
```

It uses `libevent` to run a set of queries in parallel from within a single
thread / event loop. This is a good example of how to integrate non-blocking
query processing into an event-based framework.


The non-blocking API in the client library is entirely optional. The new
library is completely ABI- and source-compatible with existing applications.
Also, applications not using non-blocking operations are not affected, nor is
there any significant performance penalty for having support for non-blocking
operations in the library for applications which do not use them.


The library internally uses co-routines, and requires a co-routine implementation to work. Native implementations are included for i386, amd64, and (since Connector/C version 3.3.12) aarch64 architectures. For other architectures, a fallback to `ucontext` is automatically used if available. An alternate fallback `boost::context` can also be used instead of `ucontext` by building with `-DWITH_BOOST_CONTEXT=ON` (`boost::context` is not used by default). If no co-routine implementation is available the non-blocking operations are disabled and will not work.


CC BY-SA / Gnu FDL

